2.2.1. Step 1: Obtain land cover datasets 

Two land cover datasets were used in the analysis: the most recent land cover dataset that has been obtained
for Chile and a historical dataset of land cover. The most recent land cover dataset is the National Mapping
of Native Vegetation Resources (Conaf-Conama-Birf,1997). This dataset consists of thematic land cover maps
derived from the interpretation of aerial photographs from 1995 and 1996. The dataset was produced at a scale
of 1:50000 with a minimum mapped unit of 6.25 ha. An intensive programme of field survey by project staff supported 
the aerial photograph interpretation. Approximately 61% of native forest was described in the field.
The historical land cover dataset was produced at a scale of 1:500000, and provides an evaluation of vegetation 
cover prior to European settlement (Lara et al., in litt). The dataset was prepared by means of interdisciplinary 
research by forest engineers, anthropologists, historians,  and  geographic  information  systems  (GIS) technicians #
using the current land cover dataset, historical forest cover maps and documents, and extrapolations based on 
elevation and topography.

Se usaron dos conjuntos de datos de cobertura terrestre en el análisis: el conjunto de datos de cobertura
terrestre más reciente que se ha obtenido para Chile y un conjunto de datos históricos de cobertura de la 
tierra. El conjunto de datos de cobertura terrestre más reciente es el Mapeo Nacional de los recursos de 
vegetación nativa (Conaf-Conama-Birf, 1997). Este conjunto de datos consiste en mapas de cobertura terrestre 
temáticos derivado de la interpretación de fotografías aéreas de 1995 y 1996. El conjunto de datos fue
producido a escala de 1: 50000 con una unidad asignada mínima de 6.25 ha. Un programa intensivo de encuesta
de campo por el personal del proyecto apoyado la interpretación de la fotografía aérea. Aproximadamente el
61% del bosque nativo se describió en el campo. El conjunto de datos históricos de la cobertura del suelo 
se produjo a una escala de 1: 500000, y proporciona una evaluación de la vegetación cubrir antes del asentamiento
europeo (Lara et al., in litt). El conjunto de datos fue preparado por medio de interdisciplinarios investigación
de ingenieros forestales, antropólogos, historiadores y técnicos de sistemas de información geográfica (GIS) 
utilizando el conjunto de datos actuales de cobertura terrestre, mapas y documentos de cobertura forestal histórica,
y extrapolaciones basadas en elevación y topografía.


2.2.2. Analyse the conversion of native forest 

The historical and current extent of native forest was determined. The extent and spatial distribution of the
conversion of native forest to plantations was then assessed. This analysis was undertaken using the map query
function in ArcView 3.1 GIS software (ESRI,Redlands, CA, USA) on a gridded version (200-m cell size) of the
land cover datasets. Determining the previous spatial distribution of a threatening process and using this in 
an assessment of future vulnerability assumes that past patterns of the threatening process are indicative of 
future patterns. To reduce the possibility of violating this assumption, the datasets chosen for assessing
changes in land cover should span a period that accounts for the contemporary factors believed to be driving 
the changes. Conversion of native forest to plantations commenced in the study region in about 1974 with the 
introduction of subsidies for plantations and other incentives to private forestry (Ministerio de Agricultura,
1974, 1979; Lara,1992). Therefore, while land cover changes over a long period have been analysed, the conversion 
of native forest to plantations has occurred only in the recent past. We have therefore, assumed that factors 
contributing to this type of land cover change still operate and predispose extant areas of native forest to
conversion to plantations. We have also assumed that plantations were converted from native forest and not 
from agricultural areas. Violating this assumption is likely to over-estimate the impact of native forest 
conversion to plantations. Intermediate datasets of land cover, if such datasets become available, could be
used to verify this assumption. 

Se determinó la extensión histórica y actual del bosque nativo. El alcance y la distribución espacial de la
luego se evaluó la conversión de bosque nativo a plantaciones. Este análisis se realizó utilizando la consulta
del mapa función en el software ArcView 3.1 GIS (ESRI, Redlands, CA, EE. UU.) en una versión cuadriculada 
(tamaño de celda de 200 m) del conjuntos de datos de cobertura terrestre. Determinar la distribución espacial 
previa de un proceso amenazante y usar esto en una evaluación de la vulnerabilidad futura supone que los patrones
pasados ​​del proceso amenazador son indicativos de patrones futuros Para reducir la posibilidad de violar esta 
suposición, los conjuntos de datos elegidos para evaluar Los cambios en la cobertura de la tierra deben abarcar
un período que tenga en cuenta los factores contemporáneos que se cree que están conduciendo los cambios. La 
conversión del bosque nativo a plantaciones comenzó en la región de estudio en aproximadamente 1974 con el 
introducción de subsidios para plantaciones y otros incentivos a la silvicultura privada (Ministerio de Agricultura,
1974, 1979; Lara, 1992). Por lo tanto, aunque se han analizado los cambios en la cobertura del suelo durante un largo
período, la conversión del bosque nativo a las plantaciones ha ocurrido solo en el pasado reciente. Por lo tanto, 
hemos asumido que los factores contribuyendo a este tipo de cambios en la cobertura de la tierra todavía operan 
y predisponen las áreas existentes de bosque nativo a conversión a plantaciones. También hemos asumido que las
plantaciones se convirtieron de bosque nativo y no de áreas agrícolas Violar esta suposición es probable que 
sobreestime el impacto del bosque nativo conversión a plantaciones. Los conjuntos de datos intermedios de cobertura 
del suelo, si dichos conjuntos de datos están disponibles, podrían ser utilizado para verificar esta suposición

a. Se determinó la extensión histórica y actual del bosque nativo
b. La extensión y distribución espacial de la conversión de bosque nativo a plantaciones fue evaluada. -> se realizo usando la "map query function" en ArcView 3.1 GIS en una version cuadriculada (gridded) (200-m cell size) de los conjuntos de datos de coberturas.
c. 

Determinar la distribución espacial previa de un proceso amenazante y usar esto en una evaluación de la vulnerabilidad futura
-supone que los patrones pasados del proceso amenazador son indicativos de patrones futuros-
Para reducir la posibilidad de violar esta suposición:
los conjuntos de datos elegidos para evaluar cambios 
**deben abarcar un período que tenga en cuenta los factores contemporáneos que se cree que están conduciendo los cambios**


Entre el periodo de tiempo entre t0 y t1 deben estar presentes los factores contemporaneos que se cree que estan conduciendo cambios. 
Factores: 
a) sociales (crecimiento poblacional/dinamicas sociales en la epoca)
b) biofisicos (
c) conservacion (aumento de AP)
 
2.2.3. Step 3: Obtain data layers for the explanatory variables

When modelling changes in land cover, analysts are commonly restricted to the variables that predispose areas
to proximate threats, rather than the ultimate driving forces, such as national and international policies
and market forces. This is because these variables directly affect changes in land cover, their effect is 
quantifiable, and they are mappable. For example, many have proposed that the propensity of a forested area 
to being cleared is a function of both the biophysical characteristics of the area (such as soil quality and 
topography) and human-related factors such as ease of access (Sader and Joyce, 1988;Grainger, 1993;Pfaff, 1999;
Liu et al., 1993;Chromitz and Gray, 1996;Reed et al., 1996;Hayes et al., 2002). Data layers for the following 
environmental variables were available for this analysis: soil type, various climatic variables, slope, altitude, 
latitude, and longitude (both measured at 0.5° intervals). Latitude was included due to its effect on temperature,
precipitation and day length (Alaback, 1991 ;Arroyo et al., 1996a). Grid layers depicting the proximity of each 
200-m grid cell to towns, roads, and timber mills were also generated using standard analysis procedures in ArcView. 
Soil type, slope, and altitude were available as categorical variables and the remainder as continuous variables. 
The soil type and climate variables were acquired at a scale of 1:250000 (Schlatter et al., 1995), and the other
variables were acquired at a scale of 1:50000 (Conaf-Conama-Birf, 1997). These datasets are the most comprehensive
presently available for the study region. Correlation matrix analysis (Sokal and Rohlf, 1981) and iterative variance
inflation factor analysis (Glantz and Slinker, 1990;Booth et al., 1994) were used to identify correlated explanatory 
variables. A subset of uncorrelated  variables  were  sought,  because  correlation among variables reduces the
precision with which model coefficients and their significance can be estimated (Farrar and Glauber, 1967;Fox, 1984).

2.2.4. Step 4: Choose model calibration and validation datasets

Calibration and validation of the classification tree model and the logistic regression model (described in
Step 5) were performed across a random subset of observations spanning the geographical and environmental space
of the study region. Each observation is a 200-m grid cell containing either native forest or plantations. 
218238 observations were allocated to the calibration dataset and 204704 observations were allocated to the
validation dataset. This sampling design is based on the assumption that plantation establishment has had
sufficient time to occur in all available environments in the study region. The model calibration data were 
independent of the validation data, to reduce the likelihood of overestimating the predictive ability of the model
(Chatfield, 1995;Harrell, 2001). 

2.2.5. Step 5: Determine the relationship between native forest conversion and the explanatory variables

The response variable (the presence or absence of native forest conversion to plantations) used for calibrating
the model was derived from the analysis of nativeforest conversion (from Step 2). This information was
extracted from the centroid of each 200-m grid cell using ArcInfo GIS software (ESRI, Redlands, CA, USA).
Each 200-m grid cell was coded based on the presence or absence of native forest conversion to plantations.
Cells under native forest cover were coded as absent and cells under plantation cover were coded as present.

For each 200-m grid cell, information was extracted on each of the uncorrelated explanatory variables (from Step 3).
The extracted information was exported into S-PLUS 2000 statistical software (MATHSOFT, 1998–1999) for further analysis.
A classification tree (Brieman et al., 1984) is a useful exploratory tool to identify important explanatory variables.
Classification trees subdivide the space spanned by the explanatory variables into regions for which the values 
of the response variable are approximately equal. Classification trees are non-parametric and can handle continuous
and categorical data. A classification tree was generated using binary recursive partitioning and the freeware software
package Recursive Partitioning and Regression Trees (RPART) for S-PLUS (Atkinson and Therneau, 2000). To generate
the classification tree, the model calibration data were first successively partitioned into homogenous subsets,
defined by a rule based on a single explanatory variable and through use of the Ginisplitting criterion. The way 
that explanatory variables are used to partition data depends on their type. For categorical variables with greater
than two levels, any combination of levels can be used to form a partition and for k levels there are 2 k  1  1
possible partitions. For continuous explanatory variables, a partition is defined as less than or greater than some 
chosen value. Variables that operate at large scales often generate partitions early in a classification tree 
(Moore et al., 1991).The ratio of absence observations to presence observations was unbalanced (ratio of 9:1), 
therefore, the loss function in RPART was used to weight the presence observations more heavily to reduce the 
chance of false-negative errors. A cost of 15 for presences and a cost of one for absences were applied. The tree
was pruned to avoid over-fitting the data with too many partitions and terminal nodes. The pruning procedure 
employed a minimal cost complexity measure to reduce the complexity, or the size of the tree to a specified level
(a cost complexity of 0.004 was used). Tenfold cross validation was used to estimate the cross-validated prediction
error rate of each possible tree to assist in obtaining the best tree in terms of predictive performance 
(De Ath and Fabricius, 2000). Therefore, the complexity of the tree was reduced while minimising an increase in 
prediction error. Finally, the chosen classification tree was represented graphically as a tree diagram  or 
dendrogram,  which  illustrates  the  splits (branches) partitioning the tree into nodes (leaves). In the terminal 
nodes, the response variable is as homogenous as possible. A multivariate, spatially explicit model of the conversion 
of native forest to plantations was developed using the statistical technique of logistic regression 
(McCullagh and Nelder, 1989), following others that have used logistic regression to generate models of land 
cover change (Ludeke et al., 1990;Schneider and Pontius,2001;Serneels and Lambin, 2001). The model was used
to identify the variables that explain the spatial distribution of native forest conversion.The relationship 
modelled was that between the binary response  variable  (one = conversion  has  occurred; zero = conversion
has not occurred) and the explanatory variables. Specifically, logistic regression uses the binomial distribution
to model the variation in a binary response, and a logit link function 

(that is, log[l/(1l)], where l is the mean response) 

to transform the linear predictor (the combination of explanatory variables) to a scale suitable for binomial data
(Agresti, 1996). As described above, the ratio of absence observations to presence observations was unbalanced. 
In logistic regression analysis, unbalanced data have been shown to generate biased probability estimates, 
resulting in underestimated probabilities of an event (King and Zeng, 2001). This problem is accentuated if the 
explanatory variables included in the model are not sufficiently able to discriminate presence and absence
observations. In the present case, the ranking of probabilities, rather than the absolute probabilities (see Step7),
is of primary interest. Thus, the issue of unbalanced datasets is likely to be less problematic. In situations
where absolute probabilities are required, King and Zeng (2001) describe procedures to correct the underestimation
of probabilities resulting from unbalanced datasets. An  iterative  modelling  process  was  undertaken. First, 
the uncorrelated explanatory variables were entered into S-PLUS separately to generate a univariate logistic 
regression model. A variable was retained if the change in deviance between the model containing the variable and 
the null model was significant at a p-value of 0.05. Second, the significant variables were entered into S-PLUS 
simultaneously to generate a multivariate logistic regression model. From this analysis, the best-fit statistical 
model was identified (refer to Step 6).

2.2.6. Step 6: Evaluate and validate the model 

To assess the fit of the model, the deviance was converted into an estimated D2 by the following formula:

D2 = (Null  Deviance–Residual  Deviance)/Null  Deviance. 

The percentage deviance explained is low in logistic regression models due to the binary nature of the response
variable (Bio et al., 1998) and should not be judged by the standards of a ‘‘good fit’’ in conventional regression 
analyses. Values between 0.2 and 0.4 represent a very good fit of a logistic regression model (Wrig-ley, 1985).
The predictive performance of the model was assessed by using the model to predict the probability of conversion 
of native forest to plantations and comparing the predictions with the actual distribution of plantations in the model
validation dataset. Discrimination is a relevant measure of predictive performance when predictions are required for 
ranking areas according to their relative vulnerability, as the discrimination ability of a model provides information 
on the degree to which higher predicted probabilities are associated with the presence of native forest conversion.

The area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve was employed to assess the discrimination 
ability of the model (Hanley and McNeil, 1982;Pontius and Schneider, 2001).

2.2.7. Step 7: Predict the future location of native forest conversion 

For each extant area of native forest, the probability of conversion to plantations (and the standard errors
associated with these predictions) was determined using the logistic regression model. These predictions were
generated using the "predict.gam" function in S-PLUS. The value of the standard errors, multiplied by a t-value
of 1.96, was added and subtracted from the logit to generate its upper and lower values. The values of the
expected, upper, and lower logits were back-transformed using the equation (1/1 + exp(logit)) to generate 
the expected, upper, and lower probabilities of native forest conversion to plantations. These probabilities
were mapped using ArcView. The output was a grid based map, with each grid cell assigned a vulnerability
rating, that is, a value representing the probability of native forest conversion to plantations. The predicted 
probabilities of conversion do not provide an indication of the imminence of conversion; rather they provide an
estimate of how likely it is that conversion will occur in an area at some stage in the future.  An  exact  
timeframe  for  the  event  is  not provided. Therefore, a relative, rather than an absolute,  vulnerability 
is  predicted.  Further,  given  the potential for the probabilities of conversion to be underestimated because
of the unbalanced calibration dataset, the predictions were used only as a relative index of conversion probability.
High probabilities were seen to indicate areas of native forest highly vulnerable to conversion.

A threshold probability was chosen to identify the areas of native forest highly vulnerable to conversion.
The best-fit model, generated using the model calibration dataset, was used to obtain predicted probabilities
of native forest conversion for the model validation dataset. To determine the appropriate threshold, a series of
threshold probabilities (in increments of 0.05) were applied to the predicted probabilities in order to convert
them to predicted presence and absence observations. The predicted presence and absence observations were compared
to the actual distribution of native forest conversion, as recorded in the validation dataset. The comparison was 
quantified using the Kappa statistic (Cohen,1960). The Kappa statistic is a measure of the proportion of agreement
after chance agreement is removed from consideration: 
(PoPcÞ1Pc;ð1Þ 

where Po is the proportion of actual observations and predicted observations that overlap,
and Pcis the proportion of actual observations and predicted observations that overlap due to chance (Landis and Koch,1977).

The Kappa statistic ranges from a minimum of negative one to a maximum of one, with a value of one indicating 
perfect overlap, zero indicating expected overlap due to chance and negative one indicating no overlap (Czaplewski, 1994).
A two by two classification table was used to calculate the Kappa statistic (Table 1). This cross-tabulated the
actual presence and absence observations with the predicted presence and absence observations.
The Kappa statistic was calculated (after Fielding nd Bell, 1997) using the formula

ðAþDÞðððAþCÞðAþBÞþðBþDÞðCþDÞÞ=NÞ½NðððAþCÞðAþBÞþðBþDÞðCþDÞÞ=NÞ½ð2Þ

The Kappa statistic was adjusted for the unbalanced nature of the dataset (after Byrt et al., 1993) using the formula

4AþD2N1:ð3Þ

The threshold probability that maximised the value of the Kappa statistic was identified (Huntley et al.,1995;
Guisan et al., 1998). The chosen threshold provided the best agreement between the actual observations
and predicted observations of native forest conversion. Areas of native forest with probabilities of conversion
above the chosen threshold probability were seen to be vulnerable to conversion. 

2.2.8. Step 8: Assess the potential impact of other factors that may increase the vulnerability of native forest to conversion

A highway is proposed for a section of the coastal range within the study region. The potential impact of
this highway on the, currently largely inaccessible, native forest in the coastal range was investigated.
Therefore, while this highway did not feature in the base model, the probabilities of conversion were 
recalculated using a dataset that included the distance to the proposed highway as an explanatory variable.
The route of the highway considered in this analysis is approximate, as the precise route of the highway
is yet to be decided. The area of native forest with an increased probability of conversion due to the
construction of the highway was obtained


dsdddf
